Add initial threat model to security considerations (#2925)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

   return candidate_pn
~~~

> # Overview of Security Properties {#security-properties}

Reviewer: This is probably better placed as a "Security Considerations" section, with the current text incorporated into this as appropriate (mostly under mitigations).

Author: Two thoughts here: 
- This was an appendix since TLS 1.3 did it as an appendix. It's kind of nice that way, since we're documenting what we believe the rest of the document says, not introducing any new attacks or mitigations that shouldn't already have been covered above.
- From a purely aesthetic perspective, having 21.11.3.2. as a section means that I refer to one of these items as: 
> Section 21.11.3.2., point 3.

All that said, I've moved this to the last section in Security Considerations for the time being, and I don't have a super strong opinion on where it finally lands. :)
TLS is also a little bit different in that most of the document is a security consideration in one way or another, so some of the reasoning that resulted in structure there is not necessarily reflected in QUIC.

Reviewer 2: It seems worth excerpting RFC 3552:
> While it is not a requirement that any given protocol or system be immune to all forms of attack, it is still necessary for authors to consider as many forms as possible.  Part of the purpose of the Security Considerations section is to explain what attacks are out of scope and what countermeasures can be applied to defend against them.
>
> There should be a clear description of the kinds of threats on the described protocol or technology.  This should be approached as an effort to perform "due diligence" in describing all known or foreseeable risks and threats to potential implementers and users.
>
> Authors MUST describe
>
>    1.   which attacks are out of scope (and why!)
>    2.   which attacks are in-scope
>          1.  and the protocol is susceptible to
>          2.  and the protocol protects against
>
> At least the following forms of attack MUST be considered:  eavesdropping, replay, message insertion, deletion, modification, and man-in-the-middle.  Potential denial of service attacks MUST be identified as well.  If the protocol incorporates cryptographic protection mechanisms, it should be clearly indicated which portions of the data are protected and what the protections are (i.e., integrity only, confidentiality, and/or endpoint authentication, etc.).  Some indication should also be given to what sorts of attacks the cryptographic protection is susceptible.  Data which should be held secret (keying material, random seeds, etc.) should be clearly labeled.

In other words, this reads a lot like a Security Considerations section.

Author: Thanks! I've moved it up and updated the text to refer to it as such.

A complete security analysis of QUIC is outside the scope of this document.  In
this appendix, we provide an informal description of the desired security
properties as an aid to implementors and to help guide protocol analysis.

We cover properties of the handshake, general transport, and migration

> separately.

Reviewer 3: I'd drop the use of "we."  In the whole `draft-ietf-quic-transport-22`, for instance, the word "we" is encountered only once, while RFC 7540 and 7541 contain no instances of this pronoun.

I suggest instead:
- _This appendix provides and informal description..._; and
- _Handshake, ...etc. are covered separately_.

Reviewer 2: ...and perhaps file an issue for that other use of "we."

Author: Removed all of the "we" from this diff, great suggestions as well, thanks!

> ## Handshake {#handshake-properties}

Reviewer 4: Maybe a 0-RTT section as well?

Author: Makes sense, good thinking! 
Probably others that might be interesting, too, not sure if it's worth adding a bunch of TBD sections, but definitely should have an issue covering writing up the 0-RTT section.

TBD.

## Short Headers {#short-headers-properties}

TBD.

## Connection Migration {#migration-properties}

> Connection Migration ({{migration}}) provides endpoints with the ability to

Reviewer 4: I don't think this intro paragraph is really necessary.

Author: Open to moving it around / trimming it down a bit. Mostly I wanted a place so if you read this you've got links and references to the appropriate sections, but without going beyond a sentence or three.

transition between IP addresses and ports on multiple paths, using one path at a
time for sending non-probing frames.  Path validation helps to establish

> bidirectional connectivity with the peer over a new path and prevents source

Reviewer: The purpose of path validation is to establish that a peer is both willing and able to receive packets sent on the path.  This helps reduce the effects of address spoofing, by limiting the number of packets sent to a spoofed address, unless an attacker is able to also receive packets sent to that address.

Author: Updated with that text, much nicer, thanks!

address spoofing from being used in a denial-of-service attack.  Migration is

> further restricted to be initiated only by QUIC clients.

Reviewer: I think that this is not a security property as much as it is a correctness or simplicity choice we made.  You can drop this sentence.

Author: Removed

This section describes the intended security properties of connection migration
when under attack by the following attackers.  These attackers all mount active
attacks, requiring injection of packets into the network, as described in
{{?RFC3552}}.

### On-Path Attacker

An on-path attacker is present between the QUIC client and server, and an
endpoint is required to send packets through this attacker to establish
connectivity on a given path.

An on-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets

> - Modify unencrypted packet headers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Modify IP and UDP packet headers
```

Author: Nice, updated

- Inject new packets
- Delay packets

> - Drop packets

Reviewer: Another point on capabilities - an on-path attacker can split datagrams that contain multiple packets and merge packets into a single datagram.

Author: Good point! Hopefully we'll catch some other cases that got left out like this one -- I've added it.

An on-path attacker cannot:

> - Modify encrypted packet payloads

Reviewer 2: Well, they can, but the packets will no longer be accepted as valid, which is part of this threat model and mitigation.  Also, you don't discuss the unencrypted, but authenticated, portions of the headers.  Perhaps you should frame the capabilities in terms of what they can do to authenticated portions of the packet, and note that the payload is both encrypted *and* authenticated?

Reviewer: Mike's point is excellent.  The point is that packets are authenticated.

Author: Updated this a bit, I suspect further discussion will also be in the security properties of short/long headers.

In the presence of an on-path attacker, QUIC aims to provide the following
properties.

> 1. An on-path attacker can interrupt a QUIC connection, causing it to fail if it

Reviewer: The attacker doesn't interrupt the connection as much as it can prevent use of the path for that connection.

There is a special case for connection establishment that needs to be called out separately, in that an attacker can prevent connection establishment with much less interaction (i.e., it doesn't need to disrupt every packet).

Author: Reworded this to be a bit more clear about exactly what's getting broken (that path, not the whole thing). 

The establishment case I think I'm going to leave for the section on the handshake here.

cannot migrate to a new path that does not contain the attacker.  This can be
achieved by dropping all packets, modifying them so that they fail to decrypt,
or other methods.

2. An on-path attacker can prevent migration to a new path for which the
attacker is also on-path by causing path validation to fail on the new path.

3. An on-path attacker cannot prevent a client from migrating to a path for
which the attacker is not on-path.

4. An on-path attacker can reduce the throughput of a connection by delaying
packets or dropping them.

### Off-Path Attacker

An off-path attacker is not directly on the path between the QUIC client and

> server, but is able to obtain copies of all packets sent between the client and

Reviewer 2: Perhaps change this to "may be able to obtain copies of some or all packets sent between the client and the server"?  Certainly there are subclasses of off-path attackers who see no traffic (inject-only) or who get only a partial view (e.g. eavesdropping on only one direction, one path, etc.).

Author: Updated, very good point, I think here I'm focusing mostly on the worst-case type of behavior (for example, assume an attacker can _always_ win a race), but I think there would be room to cover additional situations, both in the case where that changes the considerations or simply as a note that "these people also fall into this bucket".

the server.  It is also able to send copies of those packets to either endpoint.

An off-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Inject new packets

An off-path attacker cannot:

- Modify any part of a packet
- Delay packets
- Drop packets

An off-path attacker can, however, modify packets that it has observed and
inject them back into the network, potentially with spoofed source and
destination addresses.

For the purposes of this discussion, we assume that an off-path attacker has the
ability to observe, modify, and re-inject a packet into the network that will
reach the destination endpoint prior to the arrival of the original packet
observed by the attacker.  In other words, the attacker has the ability to
consistently "win" a race with the legitimate packets between the endpoints,
potentially causing the original packet to be ignored by the recipient.

We also assume that the attacker has the resources necessary to affect NAT

> state, potentially both causing an endpoint to lose its NAT binding, and an

Reviewer 2: Pick "the" or "an" here.  Jumping back and forth is throwing me; if there's a pattern, I'm not able to intuit it.

Author: I've changed some "the attacker" to "an attacker" to be more specific, we've got "an" for endpoint everywhere except one place where it's a packet between "the endpoints" that are having a conversation. 

There's a few places where we say something along the lines of 
> 2. An on-path attacker can prevent migration to a new path for which the
> attacker is also on-path by causing path validation to fail on the new path.

Which is a case where we use both "an" and "the", but otherwise it's all the same now. (And suggestions welcome for those cases, it started to sound very wrong when I switched those around.)

datagrams, causing multiple packets to be coalesced into a single datagram, or
splitting coalesced packets into multiple datagrams.  Such modification has no
functional effect on a QUIC connection, however it might change the performance
characteristics exhibited by the receiving endpoint.

A spoofing attack, in which an attacker rewrites unprotected parts of a QUIC
packet such as the source or destination address, is only effective if the
attacker can forward packets to the original endpoint, as path validation
({{migrate-validate}}) ensures that an endpoint's ability and willingness to
decrypt QUIC packets is demonstrated before sending significant amounts of data
to a new endpoint as part of an established QUIC connection.

##### On-Path Active Attacks

An attacker that can cause a packet it observes to no longer reach its intended
destination is considered an on-path attacker.  Such an attacker generally is
present between the QUIC client and server, and a QUIC endpoint is required to
send packets through this attacker to establish connectivity on a given path.

An on-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Modify IP and UDP packet headers
- Inject new packets

> - Delay packets

Reviewer 5: Delay (includes reordering)

Author: Thanks! 
Changed in bda13ed

6. An off-path attacker can become a limited on-path attacker by affecting
shared NAT state such that it sends packets to the server from the same IP
address and port that the client originally used.

##### Limited On-Path Active Attacks

A limited on-path attacker is an off-path attacker that has offered improved
routing of packets by duplicating and forwarding original packets between the
server and the client, causing those packets to arrive before the original
copies such that the original packets are dropped by the destination endpoint.

A limited on-path attacker differs from an on-path attacker in that it is not on
the original path between endpoints, and therefore the original packets sent by
an endpoint are still reaching their destination.  This means that a future
failure to route copied packets to the destination faster than their original
path will not prevent the original packets from reaching the destination.

A limited on-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Inject new packets
- Modify unencrypted packet headers

A limited on-path attacker cannot:

- Delay packets beyond the original packet duration
- Drop packets

> - Modify encrypted packet payloads

Reviewer 5: he can - but they don't work

Author: Changed in bda13ed

ID can be selected to route later packets to the same server.

## Overview of Security Properties {#security-properties}

A complete security analysis of QUIC is outside the scope of this document.
This section provides an informal description of the desired security properties
as an aid to implementors and to help guide protocol analysis.

Properties of the handshake, general transport, and connection migration are
considered separately.

### Handshake {#handshake-properties}

TBD.

### Short Headers {#short-headers-properties}

TBD.

### Connection Migration {#migration-properties}

Connection Migration ({{migration}}) provides endpoints with the ability to
transition between IP addresses and ports on multiple paths, using one path at a
time for transmission and receipt of non-probing frames.  Path validation
({{migrate-validate}}) establishes that a peer is both willing and able
to receive packets sent on a particular path.  This helps reduce the effects of
address spoofing, by limiting the number of packets sent to a spoofed address,

> unless an attacker is able to also receive packets sent to that address.

Author: Done in 70dac1d

This section describes the intended security properties of connection migration

> when under various types of attack, as described in more detail by {{?RFC3552}}.

Reviewer: You definitely need to constrain this section to just DoS consequences of migration.  Because this doesn't cover what an attacker might learn about communications.

Author: Added text to be more clear about that

For this purpose, attacks are divided into passive and active attacks, passive
attackers having the capability to read packets from the network and active
attackers having the capability to write packets into the network.

Attackers are additionally categorized as either on-path attackers or off-path

> attackers (see Section 3.5 of {{?RFC3552}}); an on-path attacker is on the

Author: Changed in 70dac1d

> critical path for a given connection and can read, modify, or remove any packet

Author: Removed in 70dac1d

it observes such that it no longer reaches its destination, while an off-path
attacker observes the packets, but cannot prevent the original packet from
reaching its intended destination. An off-path attacker can transmit arbitrary

> packets, and it may be able to attack the network so as to place itself on-path.

Author: Done in 70dac1d

#### Passive Attacks

A passive attack ({{?RFC3552}}) involves observing and potentially saving
packets being sent over the network, but does not involve sending any packets.
However, a passive attack may involve an attacker with the ability to cause a
routing change or other modification in the path taken by packets that comprise
a QUIC connection.

Both on-path and off-path attackers can mount a passive attack in which they
save observed QUIC packets for an offline attack against QUIC packet protection

> at a future time; this is true for any observer of any packet on any network.

Author: Moved this into short header section (and renamed that to packet protection, since technically that's not unique to SH even if this is not handshake-specific). Generally moved a bunch of text up, as well.

#### Active Attacks

An active attack ({{?RFC3552}}) involves writing data to the network.  An
attacker with such a capability might be in a position to additionally prevent
the original packets it observes from reaching their intended destination.  If
so, they are considered to be an on-path attacker.

An active attacker may also choose to rewrite the source or destination IP
addresses of packets that it forwards or injects. Such spoofing attacks are only
effective against a QUIC connection if the attacker can still forward the
contents of the packets to the original endpoint, since QUIC connections are

> both authenticated and encrypted.

Author: Ah, good call. This is intended to say that even if you mess with the routing of the packets by changing the addresses, the packet payloads ("contents of the packets" in the wording above) are only useful to the actual endpoints that completed the handshake.
This is likely already covered by other text, so we can probably just remove it.

> both authenticated and encrypted.

Author: Reworded and moved this around to hopefully be more clear

A blind attacker, one who injects packets without being able to observe valid
packets for a QUIC connection, is unlikely to be successful, since QUIC packet

> protection ensures that valid packets are only generated by endpoints which

Author: Updated in 70dac1d

> possess the key material established during the handshake.  Similarly, any

Author: Added

active attacker that observes QUIC packets and attempts to insert new data or
modify existing data in those packets should not be able to generate packets

> deemed valid by the receiving endpoint.

Reviewer: This belongs in earlier sections. This is packet protection.

Author: Moved a bunch of this up into packet protection section

However, an attacker can modify the boundaries between QUIC packets and UDP
datagrams, causing multiple packets to be coalesced into a single datagram, or
splitting coalesced packets into multiple datagrams.  Such modification has no
functional effect on a QUIC connection, however it might change the performance
characteristics exhibited by the receiving endpoint.

A spoofing attack, in which an attacker rewrites unprotected parts of a QUIC
packet such as the source or destination address, is only effective if the
attacker can forward packets to the original endpoint, as path validation
({{migrate-validate}}) ensures that an endpoint's ability and willingness to
decrypt QUIC packets is demonstrated before sending significant amounts of data
to a new endpoint as part of an established QUIC connection.

> ##### On-Path Active Attacks

Reviewer: I don't accept patches with five ######### in a row.  Can we bump the real stuff up a level?

Author: Looking at this in more detail, it looks like we can move much of the definition to the beginning of the whole section, which leaves this part to be much smaller and less nested. :)

Author: Moved, trimmed out the duplication, now at the top of the entire section and provides the definitions for the whole thing. Then the sections below move up one and are how those definitions, etc. apply to migration. Much better now -- thanks!

An attacker that can cause a packet it observes to no longer reach its intended
destination is considered an on-path attacker.  Such an attacker generally is
present between the QUIC client and server, and a QUIC endpoint is required to
send packets through this attacker to establish connectivity on a given path.

An on-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Modify IP and UDP packet headers
- Inject new packets
- Delay packets
- Reorder packets
- Drop packets
- Split and merge datagrams along packet boundaries

An on-path attacker cannot:

- Modify an authenticated and encrypted portion of a packet and cause the
 recipient to accept that packet

An on-path attacker has the opportunity to modify the packets that it observes,
however any modifications to an authenticated portion of a packet will cause it
to be dropped by the receiving endpoint as invalid, as QUIC payloads are both
authenticated and encrypted.

In the presence of an on-path attacker, QUIC aims to provide the following

> properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
properties:
```

Author: Fixed everywhere in 70dac1d

to a new path for which it is also an off-path attacker.

6. An off-path attacker can become a limited on-path attacker by affecting
shared NAT state such that it sends packets to the server from the same IP
address and port that the client originally used.

##### Limited On-Path Active Attacks

A limited on-path attacker is an off-path attacker that has offered improved
routing of packets by duplicating and forwarding original packets between the
server and the client, causing those packets to arrive before the original
copies such that the original packets are dropped by the destination endpoint.

A limited on-path attacker differs from an on-path attacker in that it is not on
the original path between endpoints, and therefore the original packets sent by
an endpoint are still reaching their destination.  This means that a future
failure to route copied packets to the destination faster than their original
path will not prevent the original packets from reaching the destination.

A limited on-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Inject new packets
- Modify unencrypted packet headers
- Reorder packets

A limited on-path attacker cannot:

> - Delay packets beyond the original packet duration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Delay packets so that they arrive later than packets sent on the original path
```

Author: Fixed in 70dac1d

- Drop packets
- Modify the authenticated and encrypted portion of a packet and cause the
 recipient to accept that packet

A limited on-path attacker can only delay packets up to the point that the
original packets arrive before the duplicate packets, meaning that it cannot

> offer worse routing than the original path, only improved routing.  If a limited

Reviewer: ```suggestion
offer routing with worse latency than the original path.  If a limited
```

Author: Fixed in 70dac1d

on-path attacker drops packets, the original copy will still arrive at the
destination endpoint.

In the presence of a limited on-path attacker, QUIC aims to provide the

> following properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following properties:
```

Author: Fixed everywhere in 70dac1d

ID can be selected to route later packets to the same server.

## Overview of Security Properties {#security-properties}

A complete security analysis of QUIC is outside the scope of this document.
This section provides an informal description of the desired security properties
as an aid to implementors and to help guide protocol analysis.

> QUIC provides protection against various types of attacks, as described in more

Author: Nice! No worries, rewrapped :)

#### Server-Side DoS

Computing the server's first flight for a full handshake is potentially
expensive, requiring both a signature and a key exchange computation.  In order
to prevent computational DoS attacks, QUIC incorporates a cheap token exchange
mechanism which allows servers to validate a client's IP address prior to doing
any expensive computations at the cost of a single round trip.  After a
successful handshake, servers can issue new tokens to a client which will allow
new connection establishment without incurring this cost.

#### On-Path Handshake Termination

An on-path attacker can force the QUIC handshake to fail by replacing either the
client or server Initial messages with invalid ones.  An off-path attacker can
also mount this attack by racing the Initials.  Once valid Initial messages have
been exchanged, the remaining handshake messages are protected with the
handshake keys and an on-path attacker cannot force handshake failure, though
they can produce a handshake timeout by dropping packets.

An on-path attacker can also replace the addresses of packets on either side and
therefore cause the client or server to have an incorrect view of the remote

> addresses.

Author: Yes, great idea! Added a sentence here indicating that an attack here is indistinguishable from the presence of a NAT. (We've got a similar note about some of that later, but this is a great place to start people thinking in that direction.)

protection ensures that valid packets are only generated by endpoints which
possess the key material established during the handshake; see {{handshake}} and
{{handshake-properties}}.  Similarly, any active attacker that observes QUIC
packets and attempts to insert new data or modify existing data in those packets
should not be able to generate packets deemed valid by the receiving endpoint.

A spoofing attack, in which an active attacker rewrites unprotected parts of a
QUIC packet that it forwards or injects, such as the source or destination
address, is only effective if the attacker can forward packets to the original
endpoint.  Packet protection ensures that the packet payloads can only be
processed by the endpoints that completed the handshake, and invalid QUIC
packets are ignored by those endpoints.

An attacker can also modify the boundaries between QUIC packets and UDP
datagrams, causing multiple packets to be coalesced into a single datagram, or
splitting coalesced packets into multiple datagrams.  Such modification has no
functional effect on a QUIC connection, although it might change the performance

> characteristics exhibited by the receiving endpoint.

Reviewer 2: Good observation.  I remember having discussions about heuristics that assume packets sent in a single datagram arrived together.  This means those heuristics aren't reliable.  I don't recall whether we endorsed such approaches in the document (PMTU probing, maybe?), but this suggests that we might want to explicitly caution against them.  (Not necessarily here.)

Reviewer: Of note here is that we allow Initial packets to be smaller than 1200 bytes, as long as they are coalesced with other stuff to make up a 1200 byte UDP datagram.  That too is vulnerable to this sort of composition problem.  I think that it's fine to make these assumptions and risk modification as long as they are recognized as such.  For Initial, we are doing so on the understanding that elements on the path are able to disrupt the handshake at that point anyway.  For PMTUD, we might make a different assessment as the conditions are different.

Author: Good thinking, it might be worth a note around those rules in the Initial that such a thing is possible (and might be more likely than if you just padded the initial packet?). PMTUD is probably worth calling out a little bit more clearly -- I'll file an editorial issue for each, since that's way elsewhere.

Connection Migration ({{migration}}) provides endpoints with the ability to
transition between IP addresses and ports on multiple paths, using one path at a
time for transmission and receipt of non-probing frames.  Path validation
({{migrate-validate}}) establishes that a peer is both willing and able
to receive packets sent on a particular path.  This helps reduce the effects of
address spoofing by limiting the number of packets sent to a spoofed address.

This section describes the intended security properties of connection migration
when under various types of DoS attacks.

#### On-Path Active Attacks

An attacker that can cause a packet it observes to no longer reach its intended
destination is considered an on-path attacker.  Such an attacker generally is
present between the QUIC client and server, and a QUIC endpoint is required to
send packets through this attacker to establish connectivity on a given path.

An on-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Modify IP and UDP packet headers
- Inject new packets
- Delay packets
- Reorder packets
- Drop packets
- Split and merge datagrams along packet boundaries

An on-path attacker cannot:

> - Modify an authenticated and encrypted portion of a packet and cause the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Modify an authenticated portion of a packet and cause the
```
The rejection of modified packets doesn't depend on the encryption, but the authentication.  The encryption itself is mostly irrelevant to this assertion.

Author: This seems like a nice balance with the mention of both authentication and encryption in the later paragraph, while the specific capability is only around the authenticated portion.

validate.  This flight may be long and therefore potentially allows the server
to be used as a DoS reflector/amplifier.  The mechanisms described in
{{validate-handshake}} restrict the amplification to a factor of three.

#### Server-Side DoS

Computing the server's first flight for a full handshake is potentially
expensive, requiring both a signature and a key exchange computation.  In order
to prevent computational DoS attacks, QUIC incorporates a cheap token exchange
mechanism which allows servers to validate a client's IP address prior to doing
any expensive computations at the cost of a single round trip.  After a
successful handshake, servers can issue new tokens to a client which will allow
new connection establishment without incurring this cost.

#### On-Path Handshake Termination

An on-path attacker can force the QUIC handshake to fail by replacing either the
client or server Initial messages with invalid messages.  An off-path attacker
can also mount this attack by racing the Initials.  Once valid Initial messages
have been exchanged, the remaining handshake messages are protected with the
handshake keys and an on-path attacker cannot force handshake failure, though

> they can produce a handshake timeout by dropping packets.

Reviewer 6: The on path attacker can also submit a MITM attack on the handshake.

Author: That could be a great thing to cover, can you file an issue to discuss whatever text should be here?

Reviewer 6: @erickinnear added https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/issues/3512

An on-path attacker can also replace the addresses of packets on either side and
therefore cause the client or server to have an incorrect view of the remote
addresses. Such an attack is indistinguishable from the functions performed by a
NAT.

#### Parameter Negotiation

The entire handshake is cryptographically protected, with the Initial packets
being encrypted with per-version keys and the Handshake and later packets being

> encrypted with keys derived from the TLS key exchange.  Further, parameter

Reviewer: Key exchange is correct (the key exchange depends on the message exchange, but it's the key exchange that matters here).

negotiation is folded into the TLS transcript and thus provides the same
security guarantees as ordinary TLS negotiation.  Thus, an attacker can observe
the client's transport parameters (as long as it knows the QUIC version-specific
salt) but cannot observe the server's transport parameters and cannot influence
parameter negotiation.

Connection IDs are unencrypted but integrity protected in all messages.  They

> are not incorporated in the TLS handshake transcript.

Reviewer 7: I think this second sentence can be dropped.

> are not incorporated in the TLS handshake transcript.

Reviewer: Without further elaboration, I have to agree.  

Separately, I think it was Antoine who made some (good) points about authenticating connection IDs more thoroughly that we might want to consider.  Separately though (reminds self to open an issue).

at a future time; this is true for any observer of any packet on any network.

A blind attacker, one who injects packets without being able to observe valid
packets for a QUIC connection, is unlikely to be successful, since packet
protection ensures that valid packets are only generated by endpoints which
possess the key material established during the handshake; see {{handshake}} and
{{handshake-properties}}.  Similarly, any active attacker that observes QUIC
packets and attempts to insert new data or modify existing data in those packets
should not be able to generate packets deemed valid by the receiving endpoint.

A spoofing attack, in which an active attacker rewrites unprotected parts of a
QUIC packet that it forwards or injects, such as the source or destination
address, is only effective if the attacker can forward packets to the original
endpoint.  Packet protection ensures that the packet payloads can only be
processed by the endpoints that completed the handshake, and invalid QUIC
packets are ignored by those endpoints.

An attacker can also modify the boundaries between QUIC packets and UDP
datagrams, causing multiple packets to be coalesced into a single datagram, or

> splitting coalesced packets into multiple datagrams.  Such modification has no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
splitting coalesced packets into multiple datagrams.  Aside from datagrams containing Initial packets, which require padding, modification has no
```

functional effect on a QUIC connection, although it might change the performance
characteristics exhibited by the receiving endpoint.

### Connection Migration {#migration-properties}

Connection Migration ({{migration}}) provides endpoints with the ability to
transition between IP addresses and ports on multiple paths, using one path at a
time for transmission and receipt of non-probing frames.  Path validation
({{migrate-validate}}) establishes that a peer is both willing and able
to receive packets sent on a particular path.  This helps reduce the effects of
address spoofing by limiting the number of packets sent to a spoofed address.

This section describes the intended security properties of connection migration
when under various types of DoS attacks.

#### On-Path Active Attacks

An attacker that can cause a packet it observes to no longer reach its intended

> destination is considered an on-path attacker.  Such an attacker generally is

Reviewer 8: generally is present is both a somewhat strong(implying >50% of the time) and quite vague statement.  Maybe this clause should be changed to: "When an attacker is present between the QUIC client and server, QUIC endpoints are required to send packets through the attacker to establish connectivity on a given path."?

present between the QUIC client and server, and a QUIC endpoint is required to
send packets through this attacker to establish connectivity on a given path.

An on-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Modify IP and UDP packet headers
- Inject new packets
- Delay packets
- Reorder packets
- Drop packets
- Split and merge datagrams along packet boundaries

An on-path attacker cannot:

- Modify an authenticated portion of a packet and cause the
 recipient to accept that packet

An on-path attacker has the opportunity to modify the packets that it observes,
however any modifications to an authenticated portion of a packet will cause it
to be dropped by the receiving endpoint as invalid, as QUIC payloads are both
authenticated and encrypted.

In the presence of an on-path attacker, QUIC aims to provide the following
properties:

1. An on-path attacker can prevent use of a path for a QUIC connection, causing

> it to fail if it cannot migrate to a new path that does not contain the

Reviewer 8: I'm not sure it's necessary to use the word 'migrate' here.  If the handshake hasn't completed, you can't migrate yet.  If you take my suggestion, it probably makes sense to update the other bullets.

```suggestion
it to fail if it cannot use a different path that does not contain the
```

either endpoint.

An off-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Inject new packets
- Reorder injected packets

An off-path attacker cannot:

- Modify any part of a packet
- Delay packets
- Drop packets
- Reorder original packets

An off-path attacker can, however, modify packets that it has observed and
inject them back into the network, potentially with spoofed source and
destination addresses.

For the purposes of this discussion, it is assumed that an off-path attacker has
the ability to observe, modify, and re-inject a packet into the network that
will reach the destination endpoint prior to the arrival of the original packet
observed by the attacker.  In other words, an attacker has the ability to
consistently "win" a race with the legitimate packets between the endpoints,
potentially causing the original packet to be ignored by the recipient.

It is also assumed that an attacker has the resources necessary to affect NAT
state, potentially both causing an endpoint to lose its NAT binding, and an
attacker to obtain the same port for use with its traffic.

In the presence of an off-path attacker, QUIC aims to provide the following
properties:

> 1. An off-path attacker can race packets and attempt to become a "limited"

Reviewer 8: The word race is used a few times in this section, but I don't believe it's defined and I'm not sure it's clear to everyone what it means in this context?

Reviewer: It's first use would seem to work well enough to be definitional.  I'm happy with this as it is.

on-path attacker.

2. An off-path attacker can cause path validation to succeed for forwarded
packets with the source address listed as the off-path attacker as long as it
can provide improved connectivity between the client and the server.

> 3. An off-path attacker cannot cause a connection to close.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
3. An off-path attacker cannot cause a connection to close once the handshake has completed.
```

A limited on-path attacker differs from an on-path attacker in that it is not on
the original path between endpoints, and therefore the original packets sent by
an endpoint are still reaching their destination.  This means that a future
failure to route copied packets to the destination faster than their original
path will not prevent the original packets from reaching the destination.

A limited on-path attacker can:

- Inspect packets
- Inject new packets
- Modify unencrypted packet headers
- Reorder packets

A limited on-path attacker cannot:

- Delay packets so that they arrive later than packets sent on the original path
- Drop packets
- Modify the authenticated and encrypted portion of a packet and cause the
 recipient to accept that packet

A limited on-path attacker can only delay packets up to the point that the
original packets arrive before the duplicate packets, meaning that it cannot
offer routing with worse latency than the original path.  If a limited on-path
attacker drops packets, the original copy will still arrive at the destination
endpoint.

In the presence of a limited on-path attacker, QUIC aims to provide the
following properties:

> 1. A limited on-path attacker cannot cause an active connection to close.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. A limited on-path attacker cannot cause an established connection to close.
```
